---
layout: post
title: Release 1.7.1
---

Th new [release 1.7.1](https://osm2pgsql.org/releases) fixes a few small bugs in osm2pgsql and closes some gaps in the geometry processing code released in 1.7.0. It also contains some security-related fixes as a result of the [security audit](https://osm2pgsql.org/news/2022/09/13/security-audit.html).

* Added `as_multipoint()` function to complement `as_multilinestring()` and `as_multipolygon()`.
* The functions `as_multipoint()`, `as_multilinestring()`, and `as_multipolygon()` will now always return single geometries if possible. Single geometries are always allowed where multi geometries are allowed, so this does't break anything.
* The `centroid()` function now works for all geometry types.
* New `length()` function to compute the length of a geometry in map units.
* New `reverse()` function to turn geometries around (can be useful for ways tagged with `oneway=-1`).
* The `simplify()` function is now available for multilinestrings, too. (Not for polygons yet.)
* All example code in the `flex-config` directory has been updated for the new geometry handling capabilities.
* Create nicer error messages when trying to access a missing database extension, schema, or tablespace.
* Better checking of names (of tables, schemas, etc.) used in SQL in osm2pgsql and osm2pgsql-replication to avoid potentional SQL injection issues.
* Fix: Make sure relation members show up in the correct order in multi-geometries when using slim mode.
* Fix: Do not try to run `ST_IsValid()` on `create_only` columns.
* osm2pgsql-replication: The database parameter may be empty when connection parameters are supplied via environment variables.
* osm2pgsql-replication: when installed, now runs the osm2pgsql binary that was installed with it to avoid potential security issues through PATH manipulation.
* osm2pgsql-replication: Meaningful error when middle tables do not exist or the prefix is a bad one.

