---
layout: post
title: Release 1.8.0
---

We are happy to announce the new [release
1.8.0](https://github.com/osm2pgsql-dev/osm2pgsql/releases/tag/1.8.0) of
osm2pgsql.

The largest change is the addition of much more flexible index support in the
flex output. The table definitions have a new (optional) field called `indexes`
now which takes a list of index definitions. If the field is not there, we fall
back to what we did before and create a GIST index on the only/first geometry
column of a table. But you can also define any kind of index you want: define
which index method (BTREE, GIST, ...) to use on which columns, define `WHERE`
clauses and expression indexes and much more. See the `flex-config/indexes.lua`
Lua config for some usage examples and the manual for all the details. You can
also force osm2pgsql to always build the id indexes which are normally only
built in slim mode.

The gazetteer output and the command line option `--with-forward-dependencies`
are deprecated in this release and will be removed soon. They were only needed
for Nominatim which switched to using the flex output recently.

Here are the other changes:

* Fix a problem when using osm2pgsql with a projection other than WGS84
  (EPSG:4326) or Web Mercator (EPSG:3857) which made the program really slow.
* New `pole_of_inaccessibility()` Lua function to generate reasonably good
  label points from polygons. (This function is currently marked as
  experimental, which means it can change without notice at any time.)
* Performance improvement for very small updates. Don't spin up multiple
  threads when there are less then 100 objects to process, because the extra
  overhead is not worth it.
* Implement and use our own JSON writer. This removes the dependency on
  RapidJSON which hasn't seen a new release since 2016.
* Add more checks (or does some checks earlier) to make sure your database uses
  UTF-8 encoding and that necessary database extensions are loaded and index
  methods, schemas and tablespaces you refer to in the config are actually
  available.
* A lot of code needed to be updated so it works correctly with any of the
  recent versions of the fmt library.

As always there were lots of code cleanups across the board, but especially in
code accessing the database and in the C++/Lua glue code to make it more
flexible and easier to use internally.

