---
title: Version 1.10.0
version: 1.10.0
date: 2023-11-07
manpages:
    - osm2pgsql
    - osm2pgsql-replication
---

This is a relatively small but still important release.

The new middle table format has changed slightly: the `tags` field
can now be `NULL`. This makes storage more efficient and indexing
faster. The new middle format is now declared stable and production
ready. To use it, use the command line option
`--middle-database-format=new`, in a future version of osm2pgsql
this will become the new default. If you have used this option
already with one of the 1.9.x versions of osm2pgsql you have to
reload your database or use this SQL command to update the table:
`ALTER TABLE <name> ALTER COLUMN tags DROP NOT NULL;`,
for `<name>` use `planet_osm_nodes`, `planet_osm_ways`,
and `planet_osm_rels` or the equivalents if you are using a
different table name prefix.

Other changes:

* Emit a warning that the flex output `area` type and the `add_row()`
  functions are deprecated if you use them. If you get this warning,
  read https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/tutorials/switching-from-add-row-to-insert/
* Add first/last timestamps to expire tables. Having these timestamps
  allows various expire/updating strategies.
* The `docs` directory is now called `man`, because it only contains
  the man pages. All other docs are on the project web site.
* Various improvements on the (still experimental) generalization code.
  The biggest change is that we switch from using the CImg to the OpenCV
  library which makes the code an order of magnitude faster.

