---
title: Version 1.11.0
version: 1.11.0
date: 2024-02-12
manpages:
    - osm2pgsql
    - osm2pgsql-replication
---

This release makes the
[new middle database format](https://blog.jochentopf.com/2023-07-25-improving-the-middle-of-osm2pgsql.html)
the default. If you have not
switched already, you need to reimport your database to take advantage of that.

We have changed the way we are parsing the command line options. The new code
uses the [CLI11](https://github.com/CLIUtils/CLI11) library (a copy of which
is included in the repository) and is much cleaner and also much stricter. You
now get warnings (and sometimes errors) for many combinations of options that
don't make sense. Please check the output from osm2pgsql and
osm2pgsql-replication for such messages and fix your command lines accordingly.
Note especially that duplicated options are not allowed any more. This can
happen, for instance, when using osm2pgsql-replication which adds the database
connection parameters (such as `-d`) when it calls osm2pgsql.

If all goes well this will be the last release starting with a 1. We are
planning for a version 2.0.0 in the second quarter of 2024. In that release
we will remove all the functionality that has been deprecated. We will also remove
support for the legacy database middle format and only support the new format
introduced in version 1.9.0.

Further changes:
* The number of database connections that osm2pgsql was opening could be quite
  large as it was depending on the number of tables. This is no longer the case.
  Osm2pgsql is opening far fewer connections now, usually you will not need to
  change the PostgreSQL `max_connections` settings any more.
* Osm2pgsql now adds the context (the part of osm2pgsql responsible for a
  database connection) and the connection number to the application name
  used in the database connection. This allows you to better monitor what
  osm2pgsql is doing using the `pg_stat_activity` table in the database.
* Bugfix: Using the new database format with `-x, --extra-attributes` did not
  work due to a wrong SQL command. This is fixed now.

Many thanks to [Thunderforest](https://www.thunderforest.com/) who
supported development of the features in this release.
