---
title: Version 1.4.0
version: 1.4.0
date: 2020-12-07
manpages:
    - osm2pgsql
highlights:
    - Improved log output
    - Negative object IDs in the input file are not allowed any more
    - Multiple input files work now
    - Schema is now configurable
    - New experimental "bucket index"
---

Release 1.4.0

The project has a new website at https://osm2pgsql.org now with extensive
documentation and examples, and with sections on support, contributing, news.
etc. Most of the documentation from the repository and the OSM wiki was moved
there. We still have a man page, it is now maintained in markdown format. All
the documentation, man page, help texts etc. have been cleaned up, made more
consistent and brought up to date.

The program has a much improved log output now. Each line is prefixed with a
date/timestamp and by default osm2pgsql isn't as verbose any more. You can
change the verbosity using several options. You can even have super-verbose
logging of all SQL commands issued and all data written to the database.
Warnings and errors now appear in red color if your console supports it.
Progress output is disabled when the output is redirected to a file (but there
is an option to re-enable it). When printing how low something took, osm2pgsql
will now not only print the seconds but also a more human readable format with
hours, minutes, and seconds.

In the last release (version 1.3.0) we have already added a warning when you
used input files with negative OSM object ids or input files which are not
ordered correctly. These are now not allowed any more and osm2pgsql will stop
with an error if it detects these. See the manual for how to work around this.
This allowed us to improve the handling of multiple input files. Osm2pgsql now
reads multiple input files at the same time merging the contents. This means
that you can now import several extracts in one go. Note that the extracts
still have to come from the same point in time!

Changes in the flex output (which is still marked experimental). Not that
some of these are breaking changes compared to the behaviour in version 1.3.0:

* Fix: Flex output sometimes created two id indexes on the same table.
* Set projection for geometry columns in the table configuration. The command
  line options `--latlong`, `-m`, `--merc`, `-E`, and `--proj` are not used
  by the flex output any more.
* Flex mode setting `type_column` fixed. Now also supports id columns
  compatible with Imposm.
* Optionally wrap polygon geometries in multipolygons if the geometry column
  of the target table is of type MultiPolygon.
* Switch multipolygon generation from default off to default on. The `multi`
  option on the area geometry transformation has been removed and there is
  a new option `split_at`.
* Add several Lua helper functions for flex config files.

Other changes:

* The middle, pgsql output and flex output now all support setting the schema
  used for tables, indexes and functions.
* Add support for the new API of the PROJ library (used since PROJ version 6).
* Fixed bug in 1.3.0 that didn't disable the PostgreSQL JIT processing which
  slows down osm2pgsql considerably when using PostgreSQL 12 and above.
* Do not create `planet_osm_nodes` table if flat nodes are used.
* Print database version and check that we are using a supported PostgreSQL
  version.
* Allow PostgreSQL conninfo string in `-d/--database` option.
* Removed legacy code that tried to alter existing database tables if your
  config changed since the initial import. This code could only detect and do
  very few necessary changes and therefore could not be relied upon anyway.
* Add `--with-forward-dependencies` option. This allows to disable dependency
  management. Used for Nominatim.
* There is a new "bucket index" for the node-to-way-lookup in the middle. It
  needs a lot less memory and imports are much faster, but updates will be
  slower. It is currently not enabled, but osm2pgsql experts are encouraged
  to try it out and give us feedback. See
  https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#bucket-index-for-slim-mode for
  details.
* As usual, there are various code cleanups and bug fixes.

The 'multi' output was already deprecated in the last version (1.3.0), it will
be removed in the next release.

