---
title: Version 1.5.1
version: 1.5.1
date: 2021-07-29
manpages:
    - osm2pgsql
highlights:
    - Fix bug causing data loss in large imports
    - Fix bug creating UNLOGGED tables
---

This is a bugfix release. It contains some important bug fixes,
so averybody is encouraged to update.

Here are the changes:

* When importing a planet file or a huge extract, something with
  more than about 1 billion nodes, the new RAM node location
  store could overflow a 32bit "offset" value which meant that
  the node locations would not be found again. The result were
  missing features, because osm2pgsql just ignores features with
  geometries that can not be built due to missing node locations.
* Osm2pgsql creates temporary tables as `UNLOGGED` to get better
  performance. We fixed a bug where non-temporary output tables
  were also created as `UNLOGGED` (when clustering was disabled.)
* In the flex output table columns marked `create_only` are now
  only created in final tables, not temporary tables. This avoids
  some problems, for instance when using columnn type `SERIAL`.
* Make the input data check more strict: Two versions of same
  object are not allowed in the input.
* Remove `IMMUTABLE` volatility classification from validity check
  trigger function.
* Make the directory where the config file is available in the
  flex output through the `osm2pgsql.config_dir` global Lua variable.
* Update required libosmium version to 2.17.0. The version 1.5.0
  already required this, but it wasn't documented.

