---
title: Version 1.5.0
version: 1.5.0
date: 2021-06-02
manpages:
    - osm2pgsql
highlights:
    - Flex output not experimental any more
    - Use much less memory in non-slim mode
---

This release brings quite a lot of improvements. We removed the "experimental"
label from the flex output which we introduced in version 1.3.0. There are some
small changes you might have to make to your flex configurations, see the
[Upgrading](https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#upgrading) chapter of the
manual for details.

This release also contains a rewrite of the code used to temporarily store
OSM data in memory while processing the data in non-slim mode, i.e. when you
import data without `--slim`. It now uses much less memory.

Other changes:

* The multi output which was marked as deprecated in the last versions has now
  been removed.
* This is the first release that needs a C++14 compiler.
* New [`cluster` table
  option](https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#advanced-table-definition) in
  the flex config file which allows you to disable clustering of the table data
  by geometry.
* Do not try to create indexes for flex output tables without id.
* Added flex config example (`attributes.lua`) showing how to access
  OSM object attributes (such as timestamp, user name, etc.) from Lua.
* Added a warning if `--flat-nodes/-F` is used in non-slim mode.
* Report cache memory usage when running with `--log-level=debug`.
* Report thread number in all log lines when `--log-level=debug` is set.
* Use trigger to check geometry validity on first import instead of only doing
  this when copying the data for clustering. In the flex output this validity
  check is not used any more for point geometries because they are always
  valid anyway.
* The [RapidJSON](https://rapidjson.org) library is now used and included
  in the source.
* Now needs [libosmium](https://osmcode.org/libosmium/) 2.17.0 which is
  included in the source.
* Lots of internal cleanups and restructurings.

