---
title: Version 1.7.0
version: 1.7.0
date: 2022-08-15
manpages:
    - osm2pgsql
---

For this version we rebuilt a lot of the code around geometry processing and
around expire. The different parts -- creation of geometries from OSM data,
transforming geometries (like merging and splitting linestrings) and finally
writing them out in WKB format for import into the database -- are now well
separated and tested on their own. And we added some functions for geometry
processing, too. osm2pgsql can now calculate the centroid of a polygon and
simplify linestrings using the Douglas-Peucker algorithm.

But the best part is that all of that new geometry goodness is now available
from the  Lua config files when using the flex output. There are many new ways
of processing geometries from Lua:

* The get_bbox() is now available for relations, too.
* There are new functions as_point(), as_linestring(), as_polygon(),
  as_multilinestring(), as_multipolygon(), and as_geometrycollection()
  to create geometries from OSM objects.
* Geometries can be manipulated in Lua with several functions modeled after
  the same functions in PostGIS: area(), centroid(), geometry_type(),
  line_merge(), num_geometries(), segmentize(), simplify(), srid(), and
  transform(). We expect more to come in the future. This way you can do more
  geometry processing on import removing the need for some post-processing
  in SQL.
* We used to have the somewhat magic handling of geometries with the `add_row()`
  function which only allowed a limited set of operations. This function is
  still available for backwards compatibility, but there is a new function
  `insert()` now which doesn't have this magic. Instead geometries are treated
  like any other data type giving you a lot more flexiblity. Check out the
  example config files `addresses.lua`, `generic.lua`, `simple.lua` and
  `geometries-using-insert.lua` in the `flex-config` directory for some ideas
  on what can be done.

In this version we enabled the bucket index for way nodes by default. This had
been around for a while but you needed a command line option to enable it.
After some positive feedback from the community we decided to make this the new
default. It will be used on new imports (existing databases will keep using the
old index). The new bucket index is much smaller and can save you hundreds of
gigabytes of disk space. See
https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#bucket-index-for-slim-mode for the
details.

And again a lot of code cleanups and some smaller bug fixes went into this
release. To make writing tests easier we added a new BDD testing framework
based on behave (https://behave.readthedocs.io/) and re-wrote a lot of the
existing tests. Writing tests is now much easier and a lot less tedious.

There are also a bunch of changes to the osm2pgsql-replication script to make
it easier to use.

This is the first version of osm2pgsql that needs a C++17 compiler. And there
is a new dependency on the boost::geometry library.

