---
title: Themepark User's Manual
---

# Themepark User's Manual

You need a config file to give to osm2pgsql. It first has to load the Themepark
framework:

```{lua}
local themepark = require('themepark')
```

All configuration is then done through the `themepark` variable.

After that a typical config file might set some global options and then
add topics from one or more themes.

See the `config` directory for some example config files.

## Setting Global Options

Global options can be set with `themepark:set_option(OPTION, VALUE)`. The
following options are currently used:

| Option      | Type  | Default           | Desciption |
| ----------- | ----- | ----------------- | ---------- |
| attribution | text  | `© OpenStreetMap contributors - https://openstreetmap.org/copyright` | Attribution. |
| debug       | bool  | *none (disabled)* | Set name of debug column. See the [Debug Mode section](#debug-mode) below for details. |
| extent      | array | *none*            | Extent of your map as array table with (xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax). |
| prefix      | text  | *none*            | Prefix to be used on all table names. |
| schema      | text  | `public`          | Schema to be used for all tables unless overwritten in `add_table()`. You must have created this schema in the database with `CREATE SCHEMA`. |
| srid        | int   | 3857              | SRID to be used for all geometries in all tables. |
| tags        | text  | *none (disabled)* | Set name of tags column. See the [Debug Mode section](#debug-mode) below for details. |
| tileset     | text  | `osm`             | Name of vector tiles tileset. |
| unique_id   | text  | *none (disabled)* | Add column of this name for unique autogenerated ID and matching index to all tables. Needed for some software. |
{:.desc}

The `attribution`, `extent`, and `tileset` settings are used by the tileserver
plugins only.

## Theme Search Path

Themepark will look for themes in the directories specified in the *theme
search path*. The search path can be set with the `THEMEPARK_PATH` environment
variable, it must contain a list of directory names separated with colons
(`:`). Additionally the search path will always contain the `themes` directory
in the Themepark repository.

Use `themepark:add_theme_dir(DIR)` to prepend `DIR` to the theme search path.
If `DIR` is a relative path, interpret it relative to the file the function was
called from, usually your config file.

## Adding Topics

Add any topics you want to use in your map using the
`themepark:add_topic('THEME/TOPIC', OPTIONS)` command. In most cases there
are no OPTIONS, but if the topic has some configuration options, you can set
them.

Example: `themepark:add_topic('shortbread_v1/water')`

(Basically this will include the file `themes/THEME/topics/TOPIC.lua`. If it
is the first time the `THEME` is used, it will also initialize that theme.)

For most themes/topics, the order does not matter, but some topics need to come
before others. Read the documentation for each used theme for the details.

## Name Handling

There are special topics in the `core` them which allow you to set the policy
used for names. In the simplest case you just want to have a `name` column
in all tables based on the `name` tag. This is done with:

```{lua}
themepark:add_topic('core/name-single', { column = 'name' })
```

Or you can have several names columns. In this case the `name`, `name:de`, and
`name:en` tags will end up in the columns `name`, `name_de`, and `name_en`.
Themepark will automatically relace the colons with underscores (`_`) for
easier use in the database.

```{lua}
themepark:add_topic('core/name-list', { keys = {'name', 'name:de', 'name:en'} })
```

With the `name-with-fallback` topic, you can configure this even further.
The columns will be filled based on the first tag in the list that's not empty:

```{lua}
themepark:add_topic('core/name-with-fallback', {
    keys = {
        name = { 'name', 'name:en', 'name:de' },
        name_de = { 'name:de', 'name', 'name:en' },
        name_en = { 'name:en', 'name', 'name:de' },
    }
})
```

Note that themes need to have support for the naming topics, because only they
know which tables should get a name at all.

## Using Plugins

Themepark has plugins which can be used to create config files for tileservers
etc.

Call `themepark:plugin(PLUGIN):write_config(...)` to create a config file. Note
that those autogenerated config files are probably not perfect. But they are a
good starting point for some tweaking.

Currently supported are several tile servers and you can generate Taginfo
project files.

| Plugin | For | Usage |
| ------ | --- | ----- |
| bbox   | [BBOX Server](https://www.bbox.earth/) | Call `themepark:plugin('bbox'):write_config(FILENAME.toml)`. |
| t-rex  | [T-Rex](https://t-rex.tileserver.ch/) tileserver | Call `themepark:plugin('t-rex'):write_config(FILENAME.toml)`. You need the [Lua toml module](https://luarocks.org/modules/lebje/toml) installed. Usually this is done with `luarocks install toml`. |
| tilekiln | [Tilekiln](https://github.com/pnorman/tilekiln) tileserver | Call `themepark:plugin('tilekiln'):write_config(DIR)`. The directory must exist. For this to work you need the [Lua lyaml module](https://luarocks.org/modules/gvvaughan/lyaml) installed. Usually this is done with `luarocks install lyaml`. Or install the `lua-yaml` debian package. |
| taginfo | [Taginfo Projects](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Taginfo/Projects) | Call `themepark:plugin('taginfo'):write_config(FILENAME.json)` to generate a skeleton of a projects file for taginfo. |
{:.desc}

## Debug Mode

To enable debug mode, set `themepark.debug = true` at the beginning of your
config file or set the environment variable `THEMEPARK_DEBUG`.

In debug mode you'll get some more output telling you what Themepark is doing
when running osm2pgsql. It will also enable extra debugging columns on your
database tables as follows:

**Tags:** If you set a tags column name with `themepark:set_option('tags',
NAME)` and debug mode is enabled you'll get an extra JSONB column on all your
tables with the name `NAME` with all the tags of any object you are writing
into this table.

**Debug:** If you set a debug column name with `themepark:set_option('debug',
NAME)` and debug mode is enabled you'll get an extra JSONB column on all your
tables with the name `NAME`. Themes can put any data they want into that
column, this could for instance be some data generated from the OSM tags.

Themes must have support for these debug columns and not all themes do!
{:.note}

## Running osm2pgsql

To use any Themepark config you need to set the `LUA_PATH` environment variable
so that osm2pgsql knows where to find the Themepark framework. Set it with
something like

```{sh}
export LUA_PATH="REPO_DIR/lua/?.lua;;"
```

(Replace `REPO_DIR` with the directory where you checked out the
osm2pgsql-themepark repository).

After you have set up the config file, you can run osm2pgsql as usual with
something like

```{sh}
osm2pgsql -d DATABASE -O flex -S CONFIG.lua OSM-DATA-FILE
```

## Using Themepark Functions without Theme

It is possible to use the Themepark functions for creating tables or adding
processing functions directly in your config file, without a theme. This can be
useful, for instance, to modify some tags before the processing functions of a
theme are run. See the [Author's Manual]({% link themepark/authors-manual.md %})
for available functions.

